                                                                                                 8
                                 NGINX within a Cloud
                                       Infrastructure
In the evolving landscape of web infrastructure, the shift from traditional server configurations to
cloud architectures is undeniable. Traditional deployments, where servers were manually configured
to host multiple sites or applications, are now giving way to more agile and scalable cloud-based
methods. This chapter looks at the practical aspects of adopting a cloud infrastructure, highlighting
the resource management efficiencies, enhanced security, and improved management of high traffic
demands it offers.
In this chapter, we will focus on the role of NGINX within a cloud infrastructure, using Docker as the
platform of choice. By integrating NGINX with Docker, we’ll demonstrate how to orchestrate multiple
services seamlessly, fostering a resilient and adaptable environment. Whether Docker is a new concept
to you or not, rest assured that we’ll guide you through your first Docker experience, with NGINX as
a common thread, ensuring a smooth and understandable journey into containerized deployment.
This chapter covers the following topics:

   • Understanding cloud infrastructure
   • Using Docker
   • Setting up NGINX inside Docker
   • Setting up NGINX inside Docker to proxy host applications
190   NGINX within a Cloud Infrastructure


      Understanding cloud infrastructure
      Cloud services are an integral part of our online existence. Our mobile applications synchronize
      seamlessly with their desktop counterparts, and the server once familiar to us has transformed into
      today’s cloud—a concept that simplifies life for users while making web infrastructure more complex.
      This digital metamorphosis has revolutionized the way we store and interact with our data, moving
      us toward an always-connected, cloud-centric reality.

      The traditional approach
      To comprehend the intricacies of cloud infrastructure, let’s revisit traditional setups with a modern
      cloud lens. Consider the case of WordPress, the renowned open source platform for website creation,
      which runs on a web server, a PHP server, and a database server. The classic method is to install each
      component on a single machine—a simple solution for hosting a solitary blog:




                           Figure 8.1: A traditional approach to running your web project

      However, scaling this model reveals its limitations. Various software dependencies may require
      multiple, sometimes contradictory versions, making coexistence difficult. What’s more, as services
      expand, managing them on a single server becomes more and more complicated.

      The cloud approach
      In the pursuit of hosting multiple services on a single server, we often encounter a common problem:
      conflicting software dependencies. Imagine needing to run two applications, one requiring PHP 7.4
      and the other PHP 8.3. Docker addresses this by encapsulating applications in containers, isolated
      environments that operate independently of the underlying Linux distribution’s software versions.
      Advantages of using Docker containers include the following:

         • Version management: Docker containers simplify the process of maintaining and changing
           software versions, making it easy to go back if necessary
         • Isolation and efficiency: Containers isolate applications, which not only improves portability for
           easier migration but also ensures that the resource consumption of one doesn’t affect the others
         • Deployment streamlining: By overcoming the Docker learning curve, deployment and scaling
           become easier to manage, offering a degree of flexibility not found in traditional configurations
                                                                    Understanding cloud infrastructure   191


Let’s revisit the blog hosting scenario, now using Docker:




              Figure 8.2: An example of how it would look running WordPress with Docker

The server runs a Linux distribution and, on top of this, two separate containers act as minimal Linux
environments, each carrying only what’s needed to run its respective applications.
The addition of a service such as Nextcloud, which could run PHP 8.3, alongside WordPress on
PHP 7.4, demonstrates the ability of Docker:




          Figure 8.3: An example of how it would look running multiple containers with Docker

As shown, this configuration allows many Docker images, each with its own specific software version,
to run simultaneously in an isolated environment. If a security problem occurs in one container, its
effects are confined, protecting the rest of the system.
This chapter won’t cover advanced topics such as Docker Swarm for high availability (HA) or Kubernetes
for scalability, but these are important areas to explore for the advancement of cloud infrastructure.
192   NGINX within a Cloud Infrastructure


      Using Docker
      In the previous section, we explored the fundamentals of cloud architectures. We’re now going to
      move on from theory to practice by installing and configuring Docker step by step to launch our
      first container.
      Docker is not just a tool but a paradigm shift—a new era where software can be packaged and isolated,
      ensuring consistency across environments. By the end of this section, Docker will be more than a
      concept; it will be an integral part of your toolbox, starting with the deployment of an NGINX container.

      Installing Docker
      Fortunately for us, the Docker team has provided a script that simplifies the installation process. This
      script is compatible with a range of Linux distributions, including Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL),
      CentOS, Fedora, Debian, Ubuntu, and their derivatives.
      To install Docker, you will need to run the script with root privileges. Open your terminal and enter
      the following command:

        # curl -s https://get.docker.com | bash

      With this single command, Docker will be installed natively on your system using custom repositories
      adapted to your Linux distribution’s package manager. This means that updating Docker will be as
      easy as updating any other package on your system.

      Your first Docker container
      There are many ways to operate Docker containers. For instance, you can launch a container using
      a simple command:

        root@docker:~# docker run -d nginx
        latest: Pulling from library/nginx
        e1caac4eb9d2: Pull complete

      This command pulls the NGINX image from Docker Hub and starts a new container in detached
      mode. However, this container runs with default settings and isn’t yet configured for specific use.
      To customize the container, you can pass additional parameters. For example, to map the container’s
      port 80 to the host’s port 80, allowing web traffic to reach the container, you would run the following:

        root@docker:~# docker run -d nginx -p 80:80

      The first command launches the NGINX container with the default configuration. The second
      command runs the same container, but now it is accessible via the host machine’s port 80. But what if
      you require a more advanced and complete configuration? This is where Docker Compose steps in,
      offering a solution for managing multi-container Docker applications with ease.
                                                                                        Using Docker    193


In the context of this book, the NGINX image serves as an excellent example of Docker’s capabilities
as it showcases how containerization simplifies the deployment of services that traditionally require
dedicated servers.
As we explore deeper, we’ll see how to tailor an NGINX container to serve static content or act as
a reverse proxy, introducing the concept of Docker volumes and how to use them to serve custom
configuration files and content.

Simplifying with Docker Compose
After running our first Docker container, it became clear that managing a container’s parameters
directly from the command line can quickly become cumbersome. Docker Compose simplifies this
process by allowing us to define and run multi-container Docker applications using a YAML file
for configuration.
Let’s create an equivalent setup to the one we ran in the previous section—an NGINX container with
port 80 exposed to the host machine:

  1.   Begin by creating a /root/nginx directory, and within that directory, save a file named
       docker-compose.yml with the following content:
          version: '3'
          services:
            nginx:
              image: nginx:latest
              ports:
                - "80:80"


   A reminder
   Although the file format is called YAML, the extension needs to be .yml.

       In this docker-compose.yml file, we’ve defined a service named nginx, using the official
       nginx image tagged with latest, which means it will be updated every time we pull it
       from Docker Hub. If you wish, you can specify a fixed version, such as nginx:1.25.4.
       More details can be found on the Docker Hub for NGINX page (https://hub.docker.
       com/_/nginx/).
  2.   Now, with the Docker Compose file saved, run the following command in the same directory:
          root@nginx:~/nginx# docker compose up
          [+] Running 1/1
           ✔ Container nginx-nginx-1  Created
194   NGINX within a Cloud Infrastructure


        3.   You’ve just launched your first container using Docker Compose. To stop this container, simply
             use the Ctrl + C shortcut (^C). Alternatively, you can start the container in detached mode
             with up -d and stop it with down:
                root@nginx:~/nginx# docker compose up -d
                root@nginx:~/nginx# docker compose down

      With Docker Compose, running NGINX in Docker becomes a matter of defining the desired state
      in a file, which is easier to manage and read than standalone commands. In the next section, we’ll
      explore how to further configure NGINX in Docker, tailoring it to our specific needs.

      Setting up NGINX inside Docker
      Having become familiar with Docker Compose, we’re set to advance our container usage. In this
      section, we’ll improve our NGINX container by adding personalized configurations and website content.
      Let’s begin by revisiting the docker-compose.yml file we created earlier. This file already specifies
      the NGINX service and maps the container’s port 80 to port 80 on the host machine, making the web
      server accessible from the host.
      Next, we want our NGINX container to serve our website using the actual configuration files and
      content from our host machine. To achieve this, we’ll use Docker volumes. Volumes are the preferred
      mechanism for persisting data generated and used by Docker containers. Here’s how you can modify
      the docker-compose.yml file to mount a volume:

        version: '3'
        services:
          nginx:
            image: nginx:latest
            ports:
              - «80:80»
            volumes:
              - ./config/nginx.conf:/etc/nginx/nginx.conf
              - ./html:/usr/share/nginx/html

      In this setup, ./config/nginx.conf is the path to your custom NGINX configuration file on
      your host machine. /etc/nginx/nginx.conf is the path where the NGINX container expects
      to find the configuration file. The second volume, ./html, is the directory on your host machine that
      contains your website’s content, mounted into /usr/share/nginx/html/ in the Docker container.
      This approach ensures that you can edit your NGINX configuration or website content directly on
      your host machine, and those changes will be reflected inside the container.
                                                                      Setting up NGINX inside Docker   195


   A note
   NGINX is preconfigured; therefore, you can skip mounting the nginx.conf volume and
   use the default settings. Do mount the html directory as it is where NGINX expects to find
   web content to serve.


Integrating PHP with NGINX using Docker Compose
As we progress, our next step is to elevate our NGINX server to handle dynamic content with PHP.
This combination is common in the web development world, and Docker Compose makes it easy
to implement.
We’ll start by extending our existing docker-compose.yml file to include a PHP service, and
then we will ensure NGINX can communicate with the PHP service using FastCGI:

  1.   First, we need to add a PHP service that runs FastCGI Process Manager (php-fpm). Here’s
       how the updated docker-compose.yml file might look:
          version: '3'
          services:
            nginx:
              image: nginx:latest
              ports:
                - "80:80"
              volumes:
                - ./config/nginx.conf:/etc/nginx/nginx.conf
                - ./html:/usr/share/nginx/html
              depends_on:
                - php
            php:
              image: php:8.3-fpm
              volumes:
                - ./html:/usr/share/nginx/html

       In this setup, the php service uses the official PHP image with php-fpm. We also mount the
       html directory into the PHP container to ensure it has access to the same web files as NGINX.
  2.   Before starting the Docker containers, we need to make sure NGINX and PHP communicate.
       Let’s edit the nginx.conf file to include FastCGI parameters. Here’s an example of nginx.
       conf with included FastCGI parameters:
          events {}
          http {
            server {
              listen 80;
196   NGINX within a Cloud Infrastructure


                    server_name localhost;

                    root /usr/share/nginx/html;
                    index index.php index.html index.htm;

                    location / {
                        try_files $uri $uri/ =404;
                    }

                    location ~ \.php$ {
                      try_files $uri =404;
                      fastcgi_pass php:9000;
                      fastcgi_index index.php;
                      fastcgi_param SCRIPT_FILENAME $document_root$fastcgi_
                script_name;
                      include fastcgi_params;
                    }
                  }
                }

             This configuration instructs NGINX to forward requests for PHP files to the PHP-FPM service
             running in the php container.

         Note
         NGINX resolves the php service name using Docker’s internal DNS to communicate with the
         php-fpm service. If you rename the service in your docker-compose.yml file, remember
         to update the nginx.conf file accordingly to match the new service name.


        3.   With this docker-compose.yml and nginx.conf configuration, you can run docker
             compose up, and NGINX will serve both your static content and your dynamic PHP pages:
                root@nginx:~/nginx# docker compose up
                [+] Running 2/0
                 ✔ Container docker-php-1    Created
                 ✔ Container docker-nginx-1  Created
                Attaching to nginx-1, php-1
                php-1 [02-Mar-2024 11:42:30] NOTICE: fpm is running, pid 1

        4.   After launching your containers, to check that NGINX and PHP are interacting correctly, create
             a PHP file containing <?php phpinfo(); ?>. This will display a PHP information page
             when accessed, confirming successful communication between the containers:
                                             Setting up NGINX inside Docker to proxy host applications   197




                              Figure 8.4: phpinfo running within Docker

This subsection has guided you through adding a PHP service to your Docker environment and
configuring NGINX to process PHP scripts via FastCGI. This configuration mimics a production
environment, providing a solid foundation for building and deploying PHP applications with Docker.
In the next section, we’ll explore how to configure a Docker-contained NGINX to proxy applications
running directly on the host server.

Setting up NGINX inside Docker to proxy host applications
Fortunately for us, Docker is built with inherent support for container-to-host connections. When
setting up NGINX inside a container, a special host.docker.internal hostname is used to
target the host machine.
Here’s a sample NGINX proxy configuration for interfacing with a web application hosted on the server:

  server {
      listen 80;

      location /hostapp {
          proxy_pass http://host.docker.internal:4000;
          proxy_set_header Host $host;
          proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
          proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
          proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto $scheme;
      }
  }
198   NGINX within a Cloud Infrastructure


      To ensure NGINX can communicate with the host server’s web application, check that the host’s
      firewall allows incoming traffic on the specified ports.
      Concluding this section, we’ve successfully bridged the containerized NGINX with host-resident
      applications, leveraging Docker’s internal networking features.
      In the next section, we’ll recap what we learned in this book.

      Summary
      In this chapter, we’ve taken our first steps with Docker and Docker Compose, set up an NGINX
      container, added PHP, and learned to proxy traffic to a web app on the host server.
      Combined with the knowledge from the previous chapters, the exercises in this chapter have highlighted
      NGINX’s potential as a key asset in cloud infrastructure, strengthening security and managing traffic
      efficiently, well suited for SSL handling, load balancing, and content caching.
      In the next chapter, we’ll learn how to deploy and update NGINX with automated tasks using
      orchestration tools.
